so
[Music]
good evening everyone welcome to the
third week
and welcome to the lecture today's
lecture
um it's six o'clock exact now i'll give
it perhaps one or two minutes and i'll
let more people come in and join
our group and then i will get started
with today's lecture
i hope you're all keeping well
what about now nat is it is it still the
same
thank you
[Music]
okay let's get started um welcome ladies
and gentlemen
welcome to today's
lecture as you would all know we are
in week three today uh can i please
get confirmation that uh
that you can hear me well and you are
all able to hear me clearly please
can someone just um type a message and
let me know
in the chat in the chat box
perfect thank you very much um if at any
point
my voice gets
would all know this is the third week of
this subject
and today we are going to talk about a
very
important topic and this topic has to do
with
uh with virtual with with virtualization
so if we all remember
let let us quickly recap about what we
have learned so far
because that sets up the scene
very well for what we are going to
discuss today
so week one apart from the
introduction stuff it was primarily
about
infrastructure as a service and if you
all remember
i did mention at that time that
virtualization
was a key enabling technology for
enabling cloud computing
moving on which was week two last week
we discussed about platform as a service
and software as a service and we discuss
about various different applications but
then again i
you would perhaps remember me saying
that
virtualization was again a key enabler
in both platform as a service and
software as a service
moving on the purpose of today's lecture
is to understand in greater depth
and we have a greater appreciation
of what virtualization is and
how virtualization facilitates
or enables multi-tenancy
so before i
just one second can i request everyone
please to
mute their mics um
let's so these are the learning
objectives for today's lecture
part one is essentially focused on
understanding what virtualization is and
the different types of virtual machines
when i'm talking virtual machines of
course i'm talking about
virtualizing hardware or in other words
infrastructure part two
is about the comparison
and trying to understand the differences
and the similarities
between the different types of virtual
machines
part three is where we will try to
understand
how virtualization
facilitates or enables cloud service
providers
to provide their services
at at scale due to automation part 4
is focused on the various different
applications of virtualization and also
the disadvantages
as well and last but not the least
we will discuss about virtualization
as applied to platform as a service
and software as a service
so in order to get
an better understanding of
virtualization
let's try to take an example
let's take company b as an example
and they have invested
capital or resources in procuring a
powerful web server
let's call it web server a okay
now over a duration of time
what company b has found that
this web server a has the following
utilization profile
it's being used about 50 percent of the
time
on an average the remainder 50
of the time it is completely unutilized
and because company b
has invested capital in web server a
they would like to perhaps
find a mechanism or find a way by which
they can
better fully utilize web server a
okay and this is where virtualization
comes into picture
what were using virtualization what
would happen is this
company b they would run a
virtualization
software on top of web server a could be
any virtualization software
and using this virtualization
what can happen is multiple entities
or multiple businesses can
simultaneously
interact with the web server a
in this figure you can see company b
and maybe some other company maybe
company d
these these entities are interacting
with web server a
simultaneously however the beauty
and the crux of virtualization is that
both company b and company
d they get the feeling
that they they have access to the entire
physical resource so there is nothing
that leads them to believe that they are
sharing this underlying physical
resource
with someone else it
is this technology that of
virtualization
that it takes this physical resource
which is web server a
perhaps logically slices it
into in this case two or any
finite number of smaller units
and each logical slice like in this case
this slice
is a virtual machine here
this slice is allocated to a customer
and each customer as i explained
believes
that they have an entire physical
machine
at their disposal so this is the whole
essence
of virtualization the ability to slice
and dice as they call it physical
machines
depending upon customer requirements and
the ability to
share each slice with with a given
entity now this
is what virtualization is but
virtualization as a technology as i've
explained it to you just now
is not certainly new
and certainly it is not specific
um certainly it was not something that
came about just in the past few years
grid computing and i gave you many
different examples of grid computing in
in week one was again
they used a different type of
virtualization in which
you had multiple idle resources
sitting across multiple different
computing units and you were able to
knit them together
or bring them together or logically
combine them together
virtualization as we will see today
applies to both
hardware and software many people think
of virtualization as being only
specific to hardware that's not true
it is equally applicable to software
when we are talking about virtualization
of software
we talk about things like how can you
share
a database with multiple users how can
you
share a software instance with multiple
users
so and so and so forth when we are
talking about virtualization of
hardware we are talking about how you
can take a physical web server
and create logical slices of it in other
words make
smaller units out of it and similarly i
can have
a large ssd memory for example and i can
divide it into smaller
virtual memory units
so again as we always do when we look at
important concepts um i would like to
draw your attention back to this
definition of virtualization
can i give you all maybe a few seconds
to
quickly read through the definition
please
so what this definition says is that
virtualization
is any means by which multiple
users you see i have got company b other
cloud consumers as in different
companies
can these multiple users or multiple
businesses
are able to simultaneously interact with
one physical system or with
one single computing system
while each one of them perceiving like
company b
or other cloud consumers perceiving that
they have an
entire virtual instance or an
entire instance at their own disposal
so using virtualization
these entities who are interacting with
the
physical server or with the virtual
machines
they get the illusion that they are
interacting with
they have they have the entire they have
an entire system at their disposal
and as i said when we see when we say
virtualization
it can mean virtualization to hardware
resources
like physical servers memory ram
etc or it can mean virtualization to
software resources as well
and in today's lecture we will look at
both of them
when we are talking about infrastructure
as a service
we are primarily talking about hardware
resource virtualization when we are
talking about platform as a service and
software as a service we are talking
about both
hardware and software virtualization
okay so let us now
go ahead having understood the concept
of virtualization
let us try to understand how
virtualization
is applied to hardware the most common
form of virtualization
so the most common form of
virtualization is taking a physical
server and making or creating virtual
machines from it which means
smaller logical subunits
of machines from that physical server
and these logical smaller subunits
are known as vms or virtual machines
there are three different types of
virtual machines
um and we will try to understand each
one of these three
and see uh and try to appreciate the
differences
and the similarities between them the
third
the first one is known as process
virtual machine
the second one is known as system
svm running in the host format
and the third one is known as system
virtual machine
running in the native format let's try
to
understand each one of these three and
their differences
with some examples so what's a process
virtual machine
in a in very simple in essence
a process virtual machine or pvm
it provides a framework or it provides a
platform
for executing one process
only okay so in a process virtual
machine
you can it creates an environment in
which you can run
one and only one process okay the most
common form of process
virtual machine which many of you would
have come across
is java virtual machine jvm
i'm sure many of you if not all of you
have
had some sort of programming experience
with java
when you make use or when you install
java or the java compiler
on your laptop or on your desktop what
happens is
your laptop in this case if i'm trying
to install the java compiler
has certain finite number of hardware
resources
and there is an operating system on that
when i install jvm java virtual machine
what it does is it
it installs itself as a process
or as an activity but unlike other
activities or processes
what it does is it quarantines or it
sets aside
certain slice of the underlying hardware
for its use other processes
cannot come and use this hardware
resources that the jvm
has set aside for itself
now as a code or as a programmer when
you
write a program you can
code you can write the java
program and it is saved as a dot class
file okay after this after the
dot class file when you compile it
it is converted from the dot class to
the dot
java file so this is an intermediate
code it's not machine executable code
this dot java
file or this dot java code is
intermediate
and is platform independent so you can
take this
dot java file on any java compiler
and it will run exactly the same okay
and when you execute the java
code it is then translated to the
corresponding machine code and
it runs on the slides of the hardware
that
the jvm has quarantined or has kept
aside for itself so
we have jvm running on the underlying
hardware and operating system parallelly
i can have another application too
and application three and each one of
these applications they can keep running
in parallel so these applications
or these processes
they run in a virtualized environment
because
in this case in the case of jvm it has
set aside or
quarantined a slice of the underlying
hardware resource
for itself okay so
why am i talking about java virtual
machine
in a class of cloud computing and in a
lecture of virtualization
the reason is that the way that i
describe the working of
jvm is how a classic
process virtual machine runs
so in a process virtual machine you have
shared hardware you have got shared
operating system
and you can install you can you can
virtualize and run
one process this process quarantines a
portion
of the underlying hardware for itself
and shades the operating system
similarly
on this process i can run an application
if i want
and i can have any number of
multiple processes running in parallel
okay this is this is a classic
visualization or a representation of
a pvm one thing to note
which is what differentiates a process
virtual machine
with the other types of virtual machines
is that when i create a process
within the process virtual machine
i i cannot run the operating i cannot
run
a new operating system for example when
i
have created a logical slice here this
process
i can run an application but this
application cannot be a
new operating system okay
so in other words all the processes that
are there here
they share the same underlying operating
system so um this is
this is this is how a pvm works
as and in google app engine when you
instantiate and when you are provided
with a
with a google app engine and you see
your ide or
you see the the the the
the ide in the browser that is running
as a pvm
you cannot install you
a a new operating system
within the allocated virtual machine in
google app engine
whatever host operating system google is
using
that's what it is that is the single key
defining characteristic
of a process virtual machine the fact
that
you can run a process in the virtual
machine instance
but you cannot run an operating system
or a new operating system so
moving forward let's move on from pvm to
svm host and svm native
so in contrast to a process virtual
machine
be it svm host or
be it svm native um
each virtual machine that you create or
each virtual instance
that you create can
run their own operating system
or customized operating system for
example
um i can have shared hardware when i'm
trying
to run i need to have shared hardware
when i'm trying to run
svm host and then
i've got a shared operating system and
maybe i'm running a virtualization layer
on top
this virtualization layer is known as
hypervisor there are few terms for it it
is also known as hypervisor
or it is also known as host virtual
machine monitor
so for hypervisors which are running
in the host format you see the
virtual machine monitor is running on
the host
operating system which is the shade
operating system
so once i have run an svm
running in the host format i can create
new virtual machines and each one of
these virtual machines i can install a
new operating system
okay so in in the first case i can
install
a guest operating system which is
windows
and here i can run maybe any number of
applications that i want then the second
virtual machine i can make could be unix
for example
the third one could be linux fourth one
could be another version of windows
so each virtual machine
running in the svm host format
can can install their own customized
operating system and that is the
difference between
svm host and what i said about pvm
and as i said each one of these virtual
machines i can have multiple
applications
or multiple processes running again that
is different
in pvm in the sense i can have only one
process running in a pvm
so um as i explained
in system virtual machine in svm host
the virtual machine monitor or
hypervisors
they they do the job of
hosting these virtual machines
so you may ask me what is the role or
what
activity do these host virtual machine
monitors
serve i mean they they
they serve a lot of critical activities
i mean they
they are crucial in the process of
creating this virtual machine or
decommissioning it when you need it
maintaining a snapshot of the virtual
machine
all that is done in the host virtual
machine monitor
or the hypervisor furthermore
um if
from this guest operating system maybe
the underlying operating system here is
linux for example and this one here is
windows
and for for these two operating systems
to be able to communicate
with each other with a view to
access the underlying hardware
the hypervisor has to do a lot of
translations and function calls
so the host virtual machine monitor
acts like a bridge between the guest
operating system
and the host operating system as well
okay so the role of the hypervisor
is the key in the process of managing
virtual machines as i said it serves the
purpose
of managing the whole life cycle of the
virtual machines
from its creation to deletion to
maintenance to
backup the whole lot and
it also is responsible for
translating access calls or
hardware calls between the guest
operating system
and the host operating system so
this shared operating system is also
known as the host
operating system and these
the the operating systems resting in the
virtual machines are known as guest
operating systems
okay so we have looked at system virtual
machine
svm running in the host format
so the an alternative way in which you
can run
system virtual machines is
run them in the native format and
let let me explain you how that works so
very similar to svm host you have the
shared underlying hardware
however in svm native
you do not have the host operating
system
okay if you do not have the host
operating system
the hypervisor or the
virtual machine monitor it runs
on shared hardware and because it runs
on the shade hardware
it is it is called as native in other
words
it is resting on the on the native
hardware or
just metal in other words so
again this native virtual machine
monitor it serves the same purpose
of a host virtual machine monitor in the
sense that it can create new virtual
machines
each one of these virtual machines you
can install a guest operating system and
they can run
applications so you can have
any number of n number of different
guest operating systems
and these guest operating systems they
are created they are managed by the
native
virtual machine monitor but the key
differentiating point and the point to
note
is that the native virtual machine
monitor
runs on the underlying native
hardware it does not run on a host
operating system
okay so just to recap for everyone's
benefit
the primary point of difference between
a any system
virtual machine an svm host or svm
native
and a process virtual machine is
in terms of operating system in any type
of system virtual machine you can
install you can run your own
guest operating system that is
impossible in a process virtual machine
the the primary difference again are the
two points of difference between
svm host and svm native and the two
differences are actually related
the first one is in terms of host
operating system um
in svm host you have a host operating
system
whereas that is absent in the
svm native and because
there is no host operating system in svm
native
the virtualization layer or the virtual
machine
monitor is running on the shared
underlying native hardware whereas
in the case of svm host it is running on
top
of the host operating system okay
so that's the primary difference between
svm host and svm native and that has to
do with
host operating system and
where that i mean where it has to do
with
virtual machine monitor and the host
operating system
so i hope this gives you a sense of
how virtualization is
the key technology in the process
of creating virtual machines so
moving forward the application of
virtualization
to cloud computing is not just
creating virtual machines i mean the the
ability to create a virtual machine
maintain its snapshot delete it
was actually present even before cloud
computing
but uh what major cloud service
providers have done
is they have used virtualization
um and they have
using open source virtualization
technology they have
achieved what is known as elastic
computing
what is elastic computing in very simple
words what it means is
as an end user if i'm a consumer
when i start consuming cloud resources
say virtual machine
i can start with the base minimum that i
i know that i will be using like say
two vms i can start with that
as my demand increases i can keep on
increasing
the number of vms that i'm that i'm
going to use
um and the key thing is that
as a cloud consumer i can request
any finite i can make
any reasonable request for resources i
can say
i need a thousand vms okay and
the cloud service provider can provide
me those
resources in a very timely manner
so to me as an end user just the sheer
fact that i am requesting a reasonable
amount of requests like say
1000 vms and whilst in a non-cloud world
it would perhaps
take me ages to get those provisioned
and made available to me
the cloud service provider is able to
provide it to me in a very timely manner
perhaps a few minutes
i get the illusion and i'm using the
word illusion here
that the cloud service provider has
infinite capacity
so virtualization is
the key is key in enabling
elastic computing and in particular
in giving end users the illusion
that the provider has infinite capacity
so in order to achieve elastic computing
there are two inbuilt or
there are two inbuilt features that all
the major cloud service
providers use okay the first one is
automated provisioning and the second
one
is elastic operations let's
try to understand what each one of these
features are automated provisioning
and elastic operations and how
using these two features cloud service
providers can provide
services at scale and
also in doing so give the
end users the illusion that they have
almost
infinite capacity so the first thing
is about automated provisioning
automated provisioning means
or in a non-cloud world what would
happen
is let's forget cloud computing for a
minute
in a non-cloud world the process
by which a virtual machine like for
example if i'm making a request
for a virtual machine the process by
which
a virtual machine is allocated to the
consumer
may or may not be completely automated
okay however in the cloud realm
the process of provisioning or providing
a virtual machine to a cloud consumer in
response to their request
is completely automated in other words
when a cloud consumer
is providing
the the request what happens
here is most of the major cloud service
providers
they have their own internal inter
intelligent provisioning layer or
automated provisioning layer
what this this is part of the
virtualization layer what this does
is that it takes into account multiple
factors
and then automatically decides okay
which physical machine here should the
cloud consumers
virtual machine sit should it be
physical machine a b c
or d and maybe it decides that okay
the best fit for me is say server a
so this process of
taking in customer request
taking an intelligent decision to decide
where
the request or where which physical
machine
the the virtual machine should be seated
in
like server a and d provisioning them is
completely
end to end automated there is
no human intervention involved at all
it is only due to the fact that
the major cloud service providers have
completely automated provisioning
that these cloud service providers can
provide or provision
virtual machines running into
tens of thousands daily otherwise it
would
simply not be possible if there was a
human
effort involved okay so as i said
uh in automated provisioning the process
of allocating
configuring provisioning managing
keeping a snapshot completely automated
one thing to note here is that once
say for example the automated
provisioning layer has decided that
my request or my virtual machine
should sit in server a the allocation of
the virtual machine to the physical
machine
is static that means during the life of
the virtual machine
it does not move around it doesn't the
virtual machine doesn't move from
server a to maybe b c d or
e so it is static
so that's one thing completely automated
provisioning
the second thing
that cloud service providers use
as a part of the virtualization
capability
is elastic operations the basic idea
in elastic operations is that
is that the assignment of a the basic
idea in elastic operations
is that the assignment of a virtual
machine to a
physical machine is not static
okay and it can be controlled
dynamically at runtime based on multiple
factors so
let me come to some of those factors in
some time but let me tell you what may
happen in elastic
operations so again very similar like
before
i'm a cloud consumer and i'm requesting
for
a virtual machine just one i've got
maybe a few others that are running but
at the moment i'm just requesting for
one
and very similar to what i have
explained in
automated provisioning this request is
sent to
elastic operations layer and this layer
says okay let based on the request
let this request be handled by physical
machine a
so far exactly the same about
what we discussed in the automated
provisioning
however at run time when the physical
when the virtual machine is running
in elastic operations layer what it does
it is
keeps an eye out on the performance of
the virtual machine
perhaps this virtual machine is
communicating
with a few other virtual machines
sitting in
in machine c or maybe
this physical machine where this virtual
machine
is sitting it seems that its performance
is degrading in other words its looks
like its going to fail
so in elastic operations
what may happen in elastic operations
what may happen
is the elastic operations layer keeps an
eye out for the performance of the
virtual machine
or its communication latency and
bandwidth
and if it decides that it may need to
move it from one physical machine like
machine a
to machine d so this process
of moving from one machine
physical machine a moving a virtual
machine from physical machine a
to physical machine d is
possible and happens in elastic
operations this process of moving
from one machine to another machine is
known as
virtual machine migration
okay you may be wondering why would you
need to migrate
why does one need to migrate there are
plethora of reasons maybe
the original virtual machine as was
sitting in
uh in physical machine a
maybe the elastic operations layer has
found out
that the performance of the physical
machine a
is degrading and hence
because it is degrading it wants to
migrate it proactively
before the machine degrade before the
physical machine a stops functioning
another option is or another reason is
that
it may be the case that this virtual
machine which was sitting in machine
a
was communicating with a lot of virtual
machines
sitting in physical machine d
and because it was communicating it was
experiencing
latency and perhaps delays
so to stop that it says okay given that
you have got a lot
of virtual machines in this physical
machine
let me move it closer to where all the
virtual machines are
okay alternatively it may be the case
that
a new request has come in and
and that new request is for a
for a large number of virtual machines
so what it can do is it can
consolidate using
virtual machine migration it can
consolidate
the existing workloads or existing
virtual machine workloads
into a smaller number of physical
machines
as in what it can do is all the existing
workloads in say machine
a and machine b they can take this and
move it
only to c and d and make
machine physical machine a and physical
machine be
available for new requests so you see
the whole essence of elastic operations
which is to move virtual machines
across at run time
gives cloud service providers the
ability to
consolidate existing
virtual machine loads onto a smaller set
of physical machines
and hence for you and i it almost
gives the illusion that if i put in any
reasonable request
for virtual machines that request will
not be declined because they can always
consolidate
and they can create new capacity for me
okay so this process as i said
uh the process of migrating from one
physical machine to another physical
machine
as i explained is known as virtual
machine migration
and if the underlying physical machines
are very large and cloud service
providers they have physical machines in
a data center
running into perhaps hundreds of
thousands
okay and with
with virtual machine migration they can
consolidate workloads into a smaller set
of
physical machines then for the cloud
consumers we
we almost get the illusion or feeling of
infinite capacity okay
so this virtual machine migration
is a process that is very commonly used
by
most major cloud service providers
depending upon the actual process
involved in virtual machine migration as
a consumer
you may or you may not notice that
your vm is being migrated there are
at least four steps involved in virtual
machine migration
so say if i am interacting with
aws ec2 and that is running on a
physical machine of course
and that needs to be migrated the first
thing that will happen
is it'll suspend the virtual machine's
execution so all the execution that's
being done and all of those things it
will stop it there
and it will also suspend me
as a user it will suspend any
interaction
so i can perhaps keep on giving requests
but these requests are not reaching the
virtual machine they are just being
queued
so that's the first step in second step
the virtual machines state is saved
okay third step
the saved state of the virtual machine
is
moved to the new host or through the new
physical machine
um and and in step four the execution of
the physical machine of the virtual
machine then
is then starts again and if my
requests or if my interaction has been
queued
it will be pushed back to the virtual
machine again
so these are at a very simplistic level
these are the steps involved in virtual
machine
migration or vmm migration vmware which
is a very popular virtualization
software their vmotion
tool is used for virtual machine
migration it's very common
so having looked at uh you would not
hopefully this would have given you a
sense of not just
what virtualization is the ability to
create virtual machines
um and the lot but how virtualization
can be used
specifically or how virtualization is
used
um specifically in the context of cloud
computing
okay and that is essentially to do with
automated provisioning i mean all major
cloud service providers they use
virtualization to achieve automated
provisioning
and number two virtual machine migration
okay so moving on um let's
discuss some applications of
virtualization and whilst i will only
mention a few
there are actually very many different
types of
applications the first one is
the most common uh application of
or the most common use of virtualization
is server consolidation i'm sure many of
you would have noticed that
it is not uncommon or at least
in the pre-cloud days it was not
uncommon
for whenever we start a new project
we budget for a new web server or a new
server
that that will be used perhaps only for
that project
or for those project needs
okay so what you may end up happening
is you may have multiple web servers
within a given enterprise that leads to
what is known
as a server sprawl and that is
a not a good situation to be in first of
all
if you have got n number of different
servers sitting across in your
enterprise
first of all it's inefficient because
each web server is
expensive you have spent resources
capital to purchase the web server
number two from a maintenance viewpoint
for your i.t people to be able to
maintain
manage and service any number of
different web servers is quite
a challenging ask and on top of it you
would see
that none of these web servers
are perhaps being utilized up to
capacity
i mean you can have as i said it's not
uncommon to just
procure web servers for specific
projects
so you may have web server a which is
being utilized twenty percent of the
time
web server b ten percent of the time and
web server c
fifty percent of the time okay
alternatively using virtualization what
you could do
is these desperite workloads
which are spread across multiple web
servers
and each workload being hosted by when
one web server
you could consolidate them using one
in one web server say web server d you
can run a virtualization software on top
and it can be accessed by the people
who were accessing a b web server a b
and c your id guys would be very happy
because
they only have to look after one web
server
and number two this web server is now
being utilized a decent amount like 80
in this case so addressing
server sprawl and server consolidation
is one of the most common use cases
of virtualization okay
the second
form or the second most common
uh use case of virtualization
has to do with security written for
example if i go back as i said
if i'm your ip guy and if i have to
ensure
that each one of these three web servers
are
secure they have the they have the
correct
antivirus they the each one of them are
um following the correct enterprise
policy in terms of them
it's it's a big job because
in this case we have three but if you
have got n number of different web
servers
it's difficult for it guys to go and
look
and ensure security for each one of
those
different physical servers that are
there in contrast
what is possible is
security can be embedded into the
virtualization layer
so for example if i've got this shared
hardware
even if i take a web server and if i
take this shared hardware
and if i run a native virtual machine
monitor
various security mechanisms that i want
to implement
i can embed this as the part of the
native virtual machine monitor for
example
if i have got organizational policies
on proper use of internet
or or or those things i can just
embed them in the native virtual machine
monitor
the native virtual machine monitor in
turn will make sure
that each one of these guest virtual
machines will comply
with that policy if i want to
install antivirus software for example
what i could do is i've got two options
i can install
one in guest os one two three each one
of them
and that's one approach the other one
is i can simply install it in the native
virtual machine monitor
whenever a new guest operating system is
turned on the native virtual machine
monitor will make sure that it runs the
anti-virus software
so this whole notion of bringing in
security
enabling security through the
virtualization layer is a
very powerful concept and very easy to
implement
if i've got new security software that i
want to roll out like new antivirus
version
i can simply push it out from the native
virtual machine monitor
my it guys don't need to go around and
install it in each one of them
so that's another um very very
niche use of virtualization layer
for achieving security the last
but not the least but something that we
are seeing
it's getting a lot of it is getting very
popular these days
is desktop virtualization what i mean by
that
is almost all our organizations
have a fluctuating employee base
take uts for example i'm i'm using
hypothetical numbers here
let's say uts um the number of staff in
uts
are 5000 okay but that number is not
fixed it can vary i mean 5 000
plus or minus maybe 50 or 100 or 200
on it on any day so
if if if a new person joins uts tomorrow
the process by which we would request a
desktop for him it would be provisioned
and it will be provided back to the
new employee is quite large
okay plus as in the case of a web server
for the it people
to be able to run around and configure
desktops
install uh security patches is
quite a challenging job
so in about 2013
i mean amazon launched what is what they
call as
amazon workspaces amazon workspaces
is simply put is desktop as a service
okay what it does is um
your whole desktop so what it does is
in am and i'll show you a video on that
in amazon
workspaces you can have you can take a
very large
enterprise server slice it down into
a finite number of logical units
and each small logical unit would be
a virtual desktop for a person okay
and as a user what i would do is i would
take a thin
client maybe a mobile device or a laptop
and i would simply log in to my virtual
desktop
sitting in a virtual machine okay
it saves organizations like uts a
lot of money in procuring new desktops
time in procuring new desktop it's a lot
more quicker
and more importantly the maintenance of
that
i mean keeping an eye on organizational
compliance the maintenance
is a lot more easier than physical
desktops okay so
new desktops as i said can be provided
very quickly in a matter of few minutes
at the most
and safe for tomorrow morning if if uts
wants to roll out a new software
um in all the stops it's just a click of
a button
at the virtualization layer and there is
no need for it people to go around
and install these
desktops physically or install this new
software
on these desktops okay i want to show
you a small video on
amazon workspaces just give me a second
please
uh
[Music]
the way people work and interact is
changing employees and contractors
are increasingly working remotely but
they still need
secure and reliable access to their
desktops and applications
customers are enabling this access with
amazon workspaces
as a managed secure desktop as a service
solution
you can provision for just one or go up
to tens of thousands of windows or linux
desktops for remote and contingent
workers
around the globe amazon workspaces
provides each user with access to secure
storage in the cloud
and no data is stored on the local
device ensuring your organization's
information is kept safe and protected
your remote workers can use amazon
workspaces
with no complex licensing and no
long-term contracts
making getting started simple if you
don't have an aws account
you'll need to set one up before you can
launch this service
once you have your aws account begin by
opening
amazon workspaces from the aws
management console
and click get started now launch your
quick setup
and select the bundle that best suits
your needs select users
set up a password and download the
client once the setup is complete
sign in and your end users can start
using their desktops right away to get
their job done securely
help your remote workers access a cloud
desktop anywhere
anytime and from any device with amazon
[Music]
workspaces
so coming back
so we had a look at the advantages of
virtualization
but like any other any any technology
i mean you have to be at least be
mindful of its pitfalls as well
over the years virtualization technology
has become
so mature that the probability of the
chances of
some of these pitfalls happening is
perhaps
not very high but at least as a
professional
you need to be you need to be mindful of
them
so the first thing is that in
virtualization
in a web server environment for example
if the shared hardware fails
what do you think would happen i mean as
soon as the shared hardware fails
uh the native virtual machine monitor
has
nothing to run on remember it's running
on the bare metal
just the metal it has nothing to run on
and once the native virtual machine
monitor fails
all your guest operating systems fail as
well
so that is uh one implication that you
should be
mindful of at least the second thing
is in terms of some hacker or someone
trying to
hack into and getting access to your
native virtual machine
um for example so
if in this case i mean this is not a in
the case of a hacker but
if for some reason the
native virtual machine monitor fails or
stops communicating
all your remember the at your guest
operating sys
your your guest virtual machines only
came about
because of the native virtual machine
monitor if
that is absent if that for some reason
the native virtual machine monitor
fails then the whole guest operating
systems
they stop functioning as well okay
so let's move on to the last part of
today's lecture
and then i'll perhaps stop and take
as many questions as you would all have
so so far i've spoken at
length about virtualization what it is
as a technology
how virtualization is being used in the
context of
cloud in particular of course it's being
used to create vms and managing vms but
um it virtualization is
key in enabling cloud computing from two
perspectives
automated provisioning and and and
and virtual machine mobility as they
call it
then we looked at
the advantages of virtualization
and we looked at disadvantages
something that we have not spoken so far
is
how is virtualization achieved
in platform as a service and in software
as a service
okay in other words if i take the
example of a platform as a service
i have multiple tenants sharing the same
software resources okay and the
same hardware resources
so we spoke about how multiple tenants
can
share the same hardware resources
but how are software resources such as
database and database tables how are
they
shared in platform as a service okay
so the virtualization software that is
used in pass
is different from the virtualized or has
different capabilities
from the virtualization software that is
used in infrastructure
as a service or sas as well
in the sense that in
the virtualization software for pass it
allows
sharing of software framework and
and software resources as well something
which
virtualization in infrastructure as a
service
it doesn't have that similarly
when we talk about software as a service
immediately i mean we just don't have
the application code
but we have things like database as well
and this database how is it
shared amongst multiple tenants or
multiple
users so as i said again the
the type of virtualization that is
applied
in sas and pass
is known as application level
virtualization
because it enables sharing of
software resources as well and one of
the most
common software resources that is shared
in pass and sas is
databases okay and let me try to
explain this to you with an example
let's say
i've written a very simple code for
for registering customers what my code
does
is it takes in customer details from the
user
it takes in customer details from the
user and
it stores it in the database and it
gives
an acknowledgement saying that your
customer has been
registered nothing fancy about it
quite simple software but as you might
see
that almost every organization in this
world has some sort of customer
registration process
or some sort of customer registration
activity so perhaps if i make this
a software application which as i said
takes a name and address stores it uh
in a in a in a database and gives a
acknowledgement saying that your
customer has been registered
i can provide it to a large number of
businesses a large number of enterprises
so in making this sas
that i want to i want to make this
product into a sas
and sell it to a large number of clients
what i have done is i have i have
chosen the two most common fields that
perhaps
every registration process every
customer registration process
needs to have customer name and address
okay but it may be the case that when i
try to sell this software to
user a um they want it to be
customized in a very specific manner
they want
it to take and store of course
not just name and address but passport
number as well and passport number is
quite a
sensitive piece of information
when i try to sell it to customer b
their requirements are completely
different so they want
not just the core attributes
as a name and address but
niche or specific attributes like
license number
center link number passport number
employer name and abn
so the question for me
as a software as a service provider is
how can i architect my application in
such a way
that it can store my customers details
see i've got the standard field i've got
customizations relevant to customer a
then to customer b so somehow i should
be able to store it in my
database or databases and
retrieve it when needed without
compromising on anyone's security or
privacy okay so um
the this is the fundamental question as
a sas
application how do i store my data in a
manner
that can store i can store all the
customizations of the customers
whatever customization they want but
when the customer needs it
i retrieve that their specific details
and display it back to them okay
so there are three different data
management approaches
for developing or
sharing um
for sas or even for pass as well
okay the first one is separate database
for each tenant
okay the second one is shared database
between all the tenants but
separate schema okay so you have got one
shared database but within the shared
databases you have got perhaps silos to
say
this is for this customer this is for
this customer
and the third one is you've got a shared
database
amongst multiple tenants and
the schema is also shared
as well let's try to understand how each
one of these three works
and how sas providers or even past
providers can use
the third approach only to provide
their services at scale in a truly
multi-tenant manner so
the the idea of the first approach is
quite simple so i've got
customer a whenever a new customer comes
in i instantiate
or run a new database for that customer
so customer a has come along i create a
new database for customer a
i store all information about cus user a
in this database only then come
customer user b i create a new
database for him or her and his
information goes in there
so in other words if i've got thousand
customers i've got
thousand different databases to
instantiate
manage cater for as well
now is this does would this solution
scale no it would not scale because
i mean i there would be limits into how
many
databases as a size provider i can keep
on instantiating
managing maintaining and those things
okay so uh furthermore
in this approach there is hardly any
multi-tenancy in the sense that
look whatever information is there for
user a
is being stored in this database
whatever whatever user information for
user b
is stored in this database there is
clear division there is no multi tenancy
at all
so whilst um in this separate database
for each tenant
that's how it that that's how i mean
each
tenant gets their own database to play
with
and store information it is simple to
implement
and as i said the disadvantage is that
it does not scale it is highly expensive
in terms of for for every new customer
you get you need to
keep on getting new databases as well
and
there are additional costs to secure
each database
and on top as i said it doesn't go with
the
cloud principle of multi-tenancy there
is
nothing in there that that is shared
so that was the first approach the
second approach
is shared database so you have got one
and only
one database for
all the tenants however you have got
separate schemas to store or separate
tables to store information for
different tenants so
what may happen here is that again
carrying on with the previous example
i've got customer a and customer b
i have just one single
shared large database okay
and this large database what i do
is for for customer a
i store their tables or their
information here
okay so maybe i can have one table that
has the attributes name
address passport number for customer b
here i can have name address license
number
central link number and then so once and
so forth
so one shared database but different
tables
okay so whenever there is a user query
that is coming in
so the metadata table what it does is it
tries to find out
okay where is the query coming from
it's coming from customer b let me
redirect the query to customer b
similarly the query is coming from
customer a
let me redirect to custom array so this
approach in which you multiple customers
are sharing one single database
but yet they have their own
separate schema or tables in which they
they store their information is known as
shared database and separate
schema okay now what's good about this
uh the the good thing about this
database
is that um there is one database that
the
cloud service provider has to manage
okay so it
scales much more
it scales well as compared to approach
number one
the the flip side is that
still in terms of multi-tenancy
you have specific tables that belong to
a customer
okay so these sets of tables in green
belong to customer
a these sets of tables in blue belong to
customer b
um these tables are not shared
that's the first thing the second thing
is this meta i mean
here we have got only two
customers imagine if there are tens and
thousands of customers
the the task of resolving
um these queries coming into those
can be can can potentially become a
bottleneck
okay so the third one
uh the third approach is known as shared
database
in the sense that here very much similar
to approach to you have got a shared
database
and you have got a shared schema as well
so
remember that in the previous approach
we had only a shared database
the schema was not shared but here even
the schema is
shared so there are various ways in
which
the shared database and shared schema
approach can be implemented
let me explain you the most common one
so
in for custom array what it can happen
is i can see that the attributes are
name
address passport number so i can create
one table for name one table
for address one table for passport
number
okay similarly in this case i've got
name
address license number so i can create
one more table for license number
then another table for center link
number another table for passport number
in other words in the shared schema and
shared
share database and shared schema there
are various ways by which you can
implement it
but one approach is that for every
attribute that you see
you create a table okay and
the name attribute for
customer a would go into this
table in green so as the name attribute
in customer b
would also go into the green table
as well so in this case i've got shared
database and
also the schema is shared now you might
be wondering
how do they maintain privacy of
information and how do they maintain the
the fact that one customer should not be
able to see other people's information
so what they use here is they use
something known as
tenant ide so
for this customer there will be a tenant
id
and in the shared table for
name like i think i would i have a
figure here yes so
in the shared table for let's say
passport number here
so there will be a tenant id so when i
am
retrieving when this table is retrieving
it will make sure
that the information that i'm retrieving
from this table matches with the tenant
id which is initiating the query
okay so at runtime what happens is
whenever if i'm trying to just retrieve
information about customer a
for example which is name address and
passport
the query goes to the share table and at
run time
they create joints between using this
tenant id they create joints between
name table
address table passport number table
at runtime they create these joints
they use the tenant id as a means to
ensure
that they are not retrieving the details
of any other customer these joints are
created
and are displayed back to the custom
array
so in order to ensure that these joints
are very efficient and very
fast various
cloud service providers they make use of
ssds
for running these joints or they
optimize the querying process
so as i said
in this approach you have got a single
table for multiple tenants and
in this what you do is you create one
table for every
attribute and for every new customized
table
you create a table and then you run
joins
this is the most common approach for
achieving true multi-tenancy in platform
as a service
and sas as well it's very commonly used
and as i said you might be wondering if
this
raises the issues of privacy and all but
using things like tenant id checks and
balances
they make sure that only the information
that needs to be retrieved
is retrieved
so that brings us to end of today's
lecture on virtualization
um i am happy to stop here and take
any questions from you all let me go
and see in the chat session if you have
written any questions
okay the the first thing is that um
there is there are some questions on
whether the
recorded whether the lecture is being
recorded i can confirm
that not just this one um
all the previous lectures are recorded
and
are saved in the chat session thank you
very much curtis
for pointing it out uh
prakrit i can see that you are in um
why did you please let me know if you're
having issues
so first thing um i i could see that
some of you started your own
group just before the lecture please
don't do that
i have regularly scheduled
um lectures every week
on thursday at six you just need to go
and join that
and and and i'll be there
so ahmad you have you have a question
here
does elastic operations or cloud
computing in general use the same
mirroring
technique as on premise virtualization
for redundancy
uh look that's a good question these
concepts of
elast these are concepts elastic
operations
and automated provisioning and these
have been implemented at scale by
almost all the major cloud service
providers
many of them have used open source
virtualization tools so
they have certainly um
inbuilt the concept of redundancy
and fault tolerance as well
i hope that answers your question ahmed
saath is desktop virtualization can
can use offline now unfortunately no
desktop virtualization is like any cloud
service
you need internet access to it
yes i i agree that the lack of
internet or lack of proper internet can
be
a bottleneck for desktop as a service
and i can see comments especially damien
that
it can be useful for hard disking or so
but uh but that
i mean you don't need
strong i mean broadband to be able to do
that it's just
even any internet signal should be fine
patrick berry does anyone know how to
access the tute remotely
at 7 30. can you contact me
please and i can help you with that
does the david i've seen your message
can you please
contact me just after this and i'll
certainly
put you in touch and i'll make sure that
you you are able to access the tutorial
um ansel does the about three approaches
mean that they
should have separate code bases for
customers
uh no no the code base is shared between
all the customers be it pass or sass
otherwise if the code bases
are separate there is no way either a
pass provider
or a software as a service provider
would be able to
provide these applications at scale
jeffrey where will the tutorials be held
is it on teams
if you are a post graduate student all
tutorials are on teams
alternatively if you are undergraduate
then
four of the five sessions are
on campus the other ones are on teams
uh yes sorry for the undergraduate one
which one is on
online like which one's online because
you said number five
when when does it have like when does it
happen
i'm not sure you can look it up in the
timetable please
so weighing shia when is online tutorial
held
it depends i mean if you're talking
about post graduates
all tutorials are online if you're
talking about undergraduate then there
is only one as i just told you
david i can see that you want access to
the
lab at 7 30 please as i said just send
me a message and as soon as i finish
answering all the questions
i'll be delighted to help you all
neeraj so we can do the tutorial
remotely don't have to come in person
look this the whole tutorial is in the
cloud
so i mean if if you have been allocated
to a
face to face or on campus uh
tutorial i would highly recommend you
come
you you you come
to the campus otherwise if you have been
allocated to
an online one by all means you can do it
online
curtis is vmware esxi
a host or native svm
um look i've used vmware but i have not
used esxi if you can elaborate on that
i can perhaps give you an answer on
so my understanding is that most of the
if you install esxi on the bare metal
then 100
it is native
no doubt about it
uh chris bern fernandez can you provide
an example
uh can you provide an example of where
kvm fits in host and native
um chris burn can you elaborate what do
you mean by
kvm
do you
um so kvm is uh
uh lets you do like virtual machines on
the
kernel itself so i'm just wondering on
the difference between the
the host and the native so can i run
kvm natively and then run like
virtual machine workloads
no what is kvm
um it's an open source virtualization
technology
so it's it's like your vmm uh like you
specify
look i've not played with kvm before so
uh i mean can you run can you run kvm
i mean can you run it on bare metal
uh yes then then it is definitely native
okay if if you are running it on
just the underlying hardware with no
operating system on top
it is definitely a native no
no doubt about it all right let's see
thank you curtis
um so virtualbox would be host yes it
would be
from my understanding it would be a host
svm host
[Music]
in the shade ahmad
in the shared database approaches
is approach one the most popular for big
and secure companies or not particularly
not at all
i have never come across a sas firm
i'm talking about sas forms using
approach one
it it just does not scale and it is just
not
possible to make revenue out of it
you have to be able to provide
your sas at scale and do it in a very
efficient manner
um google for example
um they they use approach three
for for most of their data so
uh i mean i know it would come
you you you you may explore this as
one of the topics you're doing in your
assignment one but
the most common approach for sas
or pass for that matter in a truly
multi-tenant one is approach three
does it answer your question ahmed
okay any other questions ladies and
gentlemen
i can see that i'm getting a few
requests for help from the lab so
uh i i'll come and help you all once i'm
once i'm done with my with answering all
the questions which of
uh are there any other questions for
today's
lecture feedback
suggestions
okay so now
oh thank you very much ansel i i i'm
thank you very much for your kind words
now uh for those of you
thank you very much ahmed for those of
you uh
i mean i know some of you would have to
run to the
lab now and i'll be as soon as i finish
my call here i will
go and help you with with the issues
that you are facing with the lab
um you should have received
an invitation from aws and you should be
able to
accept it accept in sign in and
use it for the lab if for some reason
that is is not true please
send me an email or send me a message on
teams
okay i also hope that you are finding
the
videos that i have made for you all
uh and that are available almost
five days before the lecture useful for
your understanding and then you can come
and hopefully this lecture which i'm
giving again
serves to as a refresher and then you
can ask
any questions any questions any feedback
that you have i'm here to help
okay okay then if there are no other
questions then i'll we'll perhaps draw
today's lecture to a close
i look forward to next week's lecture so
now we have covered all the basics that
we need to
we now go uh into
amazon elastic beanstalk next week
okay um thank you very much ladies and
gentlemen
uh it's a pleasure to work with you all
and i hope to see you all next week bye
bye